
---
categories: ["Publications"]
people: ["Sahar Alkhairy", "Leo Anthony Celi", "Mengling Feng", "Andrew J Zimolzak"]
title: "Acute kidney injury detection using refined and physiological-feature augmented urine output"
linktitle: Acute kidney injury detection using refined and physiological-feature augmented urine output.
date: 2021-10-01
description: >
 Over the past 3 decades, the incidence of AKI has increased over 20-fold, making it an important problem in critical care medicine. The purpose ofthis paper was to investigate the complex factors mediating the relationship between urine output and creatinine in AKI, and to develop a time varying multivariable model that identifies factors mediating the relationship based on augmentation of urine output with physiological features.
---

<a href="https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-021-97735-0" target="_blank">Nature</a>

>Acute kidney injury (AKI) is a sudden decrease in kidney function, resulting in fluid dysregulation, electrolyte abnormalities, and/or retention of waste products.

>We hypothesize that urine output can indicate AKI before a rise in creatinine, and that improved sensitivity and specificity can be achieved if the time courses of other easily physiologic variables are taken into account. This combination could be considered a "digital biomarker," rather than a chemical one such as NGAL
## Abstract

Acute kidney injury (AKI) is common in the intensive care unit, where it is associated with increased mortality. AKI is often defined using creatinine and urine output criteria. The creatinine-based definition is more reliable but less expedient, whereas the urine output based definition is rapid but less reliable. Our goal is to examine the urine output criterion and augment it with physiological features for better agreement with creatinine-based definitions of AKI. The objectives are threefold: (1) to characterize the baseline agreement of urine output and creatinine definitions of AKI; (2) to refine the urine output criteria to identify the thresholds that best agree with the creatinine-based definition; and (3) to build generalized estimating equation (GEE) and generalized linear mixed-effects (GLME) models with static and time-varying features to improve the accuracy of a near-real-time marker for AKI. We performed a retrospective observational study using data from two independent critical care databases, MIMIC-III and eICU, for critically ill patients who developed AKI in intensive care units. We found that the conventional urine output criterion (6 hr, 0.5 ml/kg/h) has specificity and sensitivity of 0.49 and 0.54 for MIMIC-III database; and specificity and sensitivity of 0.38 and 0.56 for eICU. Secondly, urine output thresholds of 12 hours and 0.6 ml/kg/h have specificity and sensitivity of 0.58 and 0.48 for MIMIC-III; and urine output thresholds of 10 hours and 0.6 ml/kg/h have specificity and sensitivity of 0.49 and 0.48 for eICU. Thirdly, the GEE model of four hours duration augmented with static and time-varying features can achieve a specificity and sensitivity of 0.66 and 0.61 for MIMIC-III; and specificity and sensitivity of 0.66 and 0.64 for eICU. The GLME model of four hours duration augmented with static and time-varying features can achieve a specificity and sensitivity of 0.71 and 0.55 for MIMIC-III; and specificity and sensitivity of 0.66 and 0.60 for eICU. The GEE model has greater performance than the GLME model, however, the GLME model is more reflective of the variables as fixed effects or random effects. The significant improvement in performance, relative to current definitions, when augmenting with patient features, suggest the need of incorporating these features when detecting disease onset and modeling at window-level rather than patient-level.